[Music]
good afternoon and welcome to the
Downing Street briefing I'm joined today
I'm joined today by Professor and by
John Newton our coordinator for testing
today it is plans for our programme of
test programme of test track and trace
how we're going to use this massive
testing capability that we've built in
order to get our are down before I do
that I just want to remind you of what
we're trying to achieve our plan is to
slow the spread and to protect the NHS
so that the NHS is always there for you
and your family whenever you need it
we're there for coronavirus or anything
else that goal is working the number of
spare critical care beds in the NHS is
3413 on the latest figures there have
been 1 million 291,000 tests for
coronavirus including 85,000 186 tests
on Sunday yesterday a hundred and ninety
thousand 584 people have now tested
positive for coronavirus an increase of
three thousand nine hundred and
eighty-five thirteen thousand two
hundred and fifty-eight people are in
hospital with and 28 thousand seven
hundred and thirty-four people have died
that's across all settings an increase
of 288 that figure is lower than at any
point since the end of March but as
we've testing these reported figures
tend to be lower over the weekend so we
do do expect that number to rise and
remember this is not just a number but
it is
constant insistent reminder that we must
go further and faster in our national
effort in dealing with this fires over
the last month we've built a national
testing infrastructure capable of over a
hundred thousand tests a day today the
capacity stands at 108 thousand this
means we're now in a position to start
implementing the next part of our plan
track and trace the aim of test track
and trace is to hunt down and isolate
the virus so it's unable to reproduce
and crucially test track and trace
allows us to take a more targeted
approach to lock down while still safely
containing the disease creating this
system is a huge unprecedented scale and
complexity
we've already be taken Britain's small
but brilliant Diagnostics industry and
taken it to global scale we're building
an army of human contact races who can
man the phones and find the contacts and
support people and of course we're
developing the contact tracing which can
help us deliver a test track and trace
on the mass scale that we need across
the country the app which takes full
consideration of privacy and security
has already been tested in close
conditions at an RAF base and today I
can announce the next steps from
tomorrow we will begin to pilot test
track and trace on the Isle of Wight
starting with health professionals and
rolling out this week to all citizens
I'm grateful to the huge enthusiasm
shown by Islanders who who know that by
participating in this pilot they're at
the forefront of helping get Britain
back on her feet where the Isle of Wight
goes britain farmers the island has a
single and interest trust one local
authority with the responsibilities for
Public Health a relatively low number of
covert cases and because it's an island
that we can run this trial in proper
typically controlled conditions
comparing the effect with the effect and
with what's going on on the mainland
before we roll it out to the rest of the
country so here's how to work last week
we put in place the testing capability
on the island from tonight the contact
tracing capability will go live and then
tomorrow NHS staff on the island will be
able to download the app and from
Thursday each one of the 80,000
households on the 11th will get a letter
from the chief nurse with comprehensive
information about the trial Islanders
will then be asked to install the app
once you've installed the app it'll
start logging the distance between your
phone and other phones with an app
nearby it's been designed with a form of
Bluetooth that conserves power so the
app won't drain your battery and this
log of proximity information will then
be securely stored on your phone if you
become unwell with kovat symptoms you
inform the NHS via the app other app
users who you've had significant contact
with in the last few days will then be
sent an alert by the NHS along with
advice about what to do a test ordering
function will then be built-in if you're
watching this and you live on the Isle
of Wight I have a simple message please
download an app to protect the NHS and
stave lives by downloading the app
you're protecting your own health you're
protecting the health of your loved ones
and the health of your community I know
the people of the Isle of Wight will
embrace this with enthusiasm because by
embarking on this project and by
embracing test track and trace you will
be saving lives the pilot is important
so we can help make sure the app works
as well as it possibly can alongside the
contact tracing system and with your
help
we'll learn a lot we'll use it to make
things better
I want to stress and this is really
important that this child does not mean
the end of social distancing on the Isle
of Wight or anywhere else for that
matter
we will only change the social
distancing rules once our five tests so
I'll end with the instruction that we
all know please stay home protect the
NHS and save lives or if you live on the
Isle of Wight stay at home install the
app protect the NHS and save lives I'll
now turn to Professor van Town to take
us through the data charts Thank You
security so let's begin again with
refreshing the five tests that we have
in place for deciding if we're going to
adjust the lockdown the first is around
NHS capacity and we're in a good
position on that one the second one is
about a sustained and consistent fall in
daily deaths from coronavirus and it is
now very clear in the data that we are
past the peak the next one is solid
information that the rate of infection
is decreasing to manageable levels right
across the board this is an indicator
that we need to keep a close eye on over
the next few days and weeks the fourth
one is around operational challenges
around testing and PPE and being able to
meet future demand there are continuing
challenges on PPE and it is an absolute
priority to continue pushing on this to
get it right in the long run but of
course in testing as you've heard from
the secretary of state we're in a very
good position and finally we have to be
confident that the adjustments we
contemplate are not going to risk a
second peak of infections and this is
really a matter of
deep scientific discussion very very
close following and absorbing of the
evidence and one that we're keeping on
the detailed scientific review as the
days and weeks go by next slide please
now this slide actually shows search
data of people looking at Apple maps for
directions over driving over walking
routes or over using public transport
and it tells the same story as slides
you have seen before about how since we
announced these social distancing
measures the public continued to observe
the instructions to work with us to work
to protect the NHS and get case numbers
down and you can see very very
consistent trends over reduced searches
for driving instructions walk
instructions and use of public transport
so we need to keep going let's keep
going and continue to drop the curve
further next slide please
these are this is a graph showing from
the 6th of April through to the 4th of
May daily tests completed for
coronavirus and you can see a
handwriting on the right-hand side the
latest 85 showing 85,000 tests completed
so this is all very encouraging tests
are going up people are using testing
services more and we are well within our
capacity capability next slide please
now this slide shows new cases of corona
virus in the UK from the 21st of March
you can see that obvious peak
up to a high level in early April and
then you can see the pattern that has
occurred in terms of new cases right up
until the fourth of May on this one I
have to say that new cases need to come
down further we have to continue to
track this index and we have to get
cases lower if you look to the next
slide please
here we array the number of people in
hospital with kovat 19 from 17th of
March through to the 3rd of May and
after peaks in the middle of April you
can see that in almost all areas now
there are steady but absolutely
consistent declines occurring possibly
in a small number of areas the trend is
somewhat flat but overall there are now
steady declines in the number of people
in hospital this is good news
following on please the next slide
critical care beds ICU beds here again
across all four nations you can see
largely continuing declines and possibly
a more important point if you look at
the axis on the left of the slide the
y-axis you can see where we are in terms
of capacity and there is plenty of ICU
capacity which is extremely good I turn
now to deaths in all settings and here
you can see that there is a slow but
consistent decline you will see the
weekend effect very clearly especially
if you look at the three steps on the
right hand side of the chart fewer
deaths are actually recorded reported at
the weekends that's an artifact of the
way people report deaths but overall if
you look at the orange line the
seven-day and smoothed out rolling
average there is this slow but
consistent decline which is absolutely
going in the right direction now
and then the final slide is one we have
shown for some time showing a comparison
across countries dating back to the day
when 5050 cumulative deaths were
recorded in each of the countries and
we're now quite away across the slide
260 old days in some of the countries
the message is the same as I've said to
you before that there are kind of three
broad trends on this curve but I do want
to emphasize to you these are numbers
they are not rates they do not adjust
for the size of the underlying
population and this is a difficulty in
interpreting these data we will in the
course of time be able to get all caused
age-adjusted excess mortality for many
of the countries on this slide and that
will give us a much clearer
understanding of what is going on and
hopefully those data will continue for a
long period of time so that we can
understand the fullness of the picture
as we try to beat this virus I will stop
thank you very much and we're now going
to provide support to the families of
those victims sadly passed away Thank
You Sakhalin an incredibly important
question Oh questions both of which
we're working hard to address and to set
out the details but what I'd say
absolutely from the start is that we
recognize that there has been a
disproportionately high number of people
from black and ethnic minority
backgrounds who have passed away
amongst the care workers and those in
the NHS and I I pay tribute to them
before and I will do so again because
the NHS is an amazing organization that
has been built on the dedication of
people from all backgrounds and this
including many many who've come to this
country to to give their lives working
in the NHS and disproportionately
employs people from ethnic minority
backgrounds and and yet we have seen
this impact in the data and I think it's
affected a lot of us working on it to
see that and so we've got a lot of work
going into fully understand
scientifically and make sure that in
every single case we what we can to
protect people better in terms of
support for the families of those who've
passed away for those working in the NHS
we have a we now have a program of
support that we've been able to put in
place that is there for everybody who
has say is from a family where where
somebody has died while since service
and including across pharmacy across
social can that so I think that's a
really important thing for us to do to
recognize the sacrifice of those put
themselves at risk and by going to work
in this in what can be dangerous
conditions where they might be working
with those who have coded 90 yes
I'm extremely sorry extremely sorry um
whenever I hear of a healthcare worker
death due to coronavirus whether it's
and someone from a black and minority
ethnic group or or otherwise it doesn't
show it takes courage to work in the NHS
at a time like this and it's most
difficult on the subject of the signal
that we have so far on black and
minority ethnic groups
I want to say to you that we are taking
it incredibly seriously there is a very
big piece of scientific work now ongoing
that will report to the chief medical
officer and we'll get to the bottom of
this however long it takes us but I will
also say that this is a complicated
picture because when you start to study
patterns of disease across different
ethnic groups you also have to take into
account potential differences in the age
structure between groups also
differences in the patterns of
underlying medical conditions which we
know do vary by ethnic group and
therefore it's a complicated picture and
also deprivation has to be taken into
account where people live and all of
this is complex it takes time and I'm
not going to rush the answer I think we
owe it to minority ethnic groups to get
this right and get a clear signal for
you and you'll have worked out I'm from
and we will get to the bottom of this
could be that Professor Newton has some
further epidemiological granularity he'd
like to add on this point we know do you
have an impact on the effect of
coronavirus but it's really clear from
some of the published data that the
impact in the enemy groups is greater
that there are more people with the
infection and those who have the
infection have had worse outcomes in
many cases so there is already cause for
concern but as Johnson says we're not
entire solid tiny clear how much of that
is due to different levels of underlying
conditions or other risk factors so
there is work to be done and we will be
publishing this as soon as it's ready
thank you very much thank you cycling
the next questions from Conrad from
Ashford and Conrad asks going forward
will the primary aim of test track and
trace be to squash the occurrence
Kovach 19 infections of very low levels
or simply to flatten the curve enough
that the NHS is not overwhelmed and that
is a really important question Conrad
the answer is that test track and trace
will help us to get the are down and to
get the number of new cases down and to
keep it down but not on its own it's
primarily the social distancing measures
that we've taken so far that I've
flattened the curve and now the we can
see that the curve is going down from
the presentation that Professor Bantam
just gave the goal is to keep the number
of new infections going down and bring
in the test track and trace but at a
point which we will do well tomorrow
from tomorrow in the Isle of Wight and
then rolling out to the rest of the
country will will we will get those
numbers down the test track trace
becomes more effective the lower the
number and then we want to keep the
number going down by keeping the are
below one the rate of infection so it is
not our goal is not simply to flatten
the curve it is to get the occurrence of
common 19 infections to very low levels
to be absolutely clear we do in your
question that that is the answer thanks
very much and we'll now take questions
from the media you pin from the BBC BBC
thank you very much when will you have
recruited your 18,000 contact tracers
and when will the full test track and
trace network be up and running the aim
is to have the whole thing up and
running in the by the middle of this
month already we've already started the
recruitment already recruited and we are
making very rapid progress the training
that's necessary a short piece of
training and we have enough to get going
on the Isle of Wight in fact they came
on
as all five o'clock this evening so that
that's up and running now and then to
roll out across the country but there's
no there's no magic around the 18,000
figure that is the initial scale that we
think is necessary if we'd needs to be
bigger when we find out from the ONS
survey that's in the field at the moment
what the prevalence of the disease is
the number of new cases per day actually
out there rather than that we find
through positive tests then we will then
we'll adjust that figure that's the
initial goal but it'll be up and running
of course on business some businesses
will be required to have PPE for their
staff where will they procure it and
will they be in competition with the NHS
well this is a question when we consider
changes to the social distancing their
measures the wider impact of changes to
social distancing measures including for
instance on PPE and the first call on
PPE must go to the NHS and social care
and those other essential services who
need it to keep the people delivering
those services safe and so that is
something that we take into account it's
in our five tests but it is something
that we're working very hard on now of
course it's our job in running the
health and social care system to ensure
that those areas and the other public
services have PPE but and there's a
worldwide shortage and as you say so we
do need to take that into consideration
before making before making changes
that's why it's one of our five tests
thanks very much at at Tom Clark from
ITV Thank You Secretary of State's um
the most successful contact tracing
efforts around the world like those
again and South Korea Singapore were
only partly reliant on mobile phone
technology in order to work they were
more
large numbers of volunteers on a
community level going out to track down
and trace cases at huge scale has the
government insured this capacity is in
place in the UK or are we putting too
much faith in call centres and in
untested digital technologies it's a
really important point and I agree with
the with the point in the question which
is that it isn't just about the
technology and the people in call
centres it's also about citizens acting
in the right way and acting in the right
way to download the app because that
protects you and protects your family
and protects the NHS but also acting in
the right way to do contact tracing
really good it's a really good point
well made the app is very exciting and
the app adds something extra that's
almost immediate but as you say the
program that we're putting in place is
an integrated program with the app but
also with contact tracing driven by
testing so access to testing also tests
and then the test result backed up by
contact tracing driven by public health
professionals England all say a lot of
experience on the ground with directors
of public health and local authorities
environmental health officers who are
very expert in this exactly as you say
shoe-leather epidemiology out on the
streets
finding contacts but even actually what
people call traditional contact tracing
isn't very traditional anymore it's
quite also it's quite highly technical
so we've developed a web-based supports
a contact tracing an advisory service
which has been ramped up to support this
and there's also another line of
Defense's with a telephone call centre
so it's a multi-layered approach and one
of the points of the I'll wine test a
pilot is to try and see how those
different elements integrate together to
support each other we are learning from
the best practice around the world but
we also have something to offer
as well as we've been doing this for a
long time thanks Tom I hope that answers
your question yes I may have a quick
follow-up question are we are we caught
in something of a catch-22 with contact
tracing as I understand it the numbers
of cases have to fall quite a bit more
before we can reliably roll it out
across the country but if we had to know
[Music]
contact tracing can still have an impact
and the app will still be highly
effective it's just more effective of
new cases so these are all matters of
degree rather than absolute so we're not
caught in a catch-22 but is absolutely
true that the social distancing measures
are the thing that we're doing they're
having a big impact and so the hence the
message remains stay at home to protect
the NHS and save lives unless you're in
the Isle of Wight but in your even in
the Isle of Wight you should still stay
at home to protect the NHS and save
lives that you should also install
because that will help more effective
one final point on this which is the
Isle of Wight has a slightly lower rate
of covert Newcomen infections than some
other places in the country and
therefore actually is a that makes it a
good place to test this
it has that slightly lower number of new
infections lockdown measures until
contact tracing is up and running across
the country no the two aren't aren't
necessarily linked like that we haven't
said that you we can't make changes
before it's up and running it's just
that the test track and trace system
will help us to get our down and hold
our down and the lower the number of new
cases the more effective it will be but
we haven't made a concrete link that
your question drew between the number
between the having this system in place
nationally and making changes to the
social distancing measures we there
isn't a necessary link between the two
they're just they do work in tandem the
next question is from Oliver Dyer from
Isle of Wight radio even in all in a
poll that Isle of Wight radio ran today
80% of our listeners that they would
install this new app but the island has
a higher than average elderly population
who fall into the government's
vulnerable category
how are you expecting those who don't
have a smartphone or can't use that
technology it's on the island or across
the country to get behind this and with
that in mind considering the island has
an older population is why the islands
over Islands 19 and so I'm really
pleased that the people have responded
today in this way but partly because of
the challenges
that not everybody has a know of a
smartphone that that's that's another
reason actually to test it in the Isle
of Wight because if we tested it
somewhere where it would be easy we
wouldn't find as many of the challenges
rather than testing it somewhere where
you've got to do that you've got to have
the technology you've got to have the
human contact tracing as well they go
they go hand in hand they help each
other and so that's that is actually one
of the things we thought about before
choosing the arm acquires the place to
go first to do this it's quite a large
population and there is a benefit in the
fact that the island is relative you
expected the ferries it is an ideal
place to look at the epidemiology and
see the impact I saw say I used to be
the Regional Director of Public Health
for south-central including the
otherwise I know that you know the
island is is very well equipped to
respond very coherent group we've had
tremendous support from the local
authority from the NHS from the local MP
and like everybody else I think it's
going to be a great success as a as a
pilot and elderly people I think we
shouldn't first you shouldn't make
assumptions I don't know quite a lot of
elderly people are extremely tech savvy
and quite happy to use small things but
we've also recognized that there are
other ways of doing contact tracing so
as I mentioned we've built in a number
of reefs so people don't have to have
the benefit but of course we will all
benefit if the app and the contact
tracing drives down the infection rate
it drives down the infection rate for
everybody and I think the third point to
say is the people who are most mobile
and most likely to be out bumping into
each other are also the people who are
probably most likely to be using
smartphones so I think all in all we
think it's a strong program and we're
looking forward to see how it works and
you know white and that survey is
extremely encouraging thank you it does
yeah I'm gonna add one more follow-up
go ahead antastic so obviously whilst a
lot of people will global radio
listeners in particular I have been
positive
about the app there are some concerns
that the lockdown measures could be
lifted here early to form part of that
trial could lock down on the eyelid
weight being lifted earlier than the
rest of the Mutai and if so is it safe
to do so well I want to thank Isle of
Wight radio listeners for how much
they've engaged with this this this idea
today and I can reassure you that there
aren't any changes to social distancing
measures that are proposed as part of
this pilot the pilot is to find out how
the app works how the interaction of
people then becomes recognized by the
technology and the the link from that to
the human contact tracing and to the
testing regime because there's a new
testing center on the Isle of Wight as
well and so there aren't changes our
proposals are that changes to be to the
social distancing will only take place
when the five tests are met and that's
nationally rather than the Isle of Wight
having having any differences in that
part to the rest of the country thanks
very much about Joe Murphy from the Ely
Sabbath good afternoon
um can I ask the scientists how has your
understanding of immunity developed over
the last month or so do you know yet
whether people will catch it again and
how are the tests developing how the
testing of the tests going do you see
antibodies and immunity playing a really
significant role in easing out of
lockdown or not and sexually state if I
could just ask a follow to Conrad's
question and who asked how low the
numbers we go you said very low um then
you put a figure on that the answer to
the no and the answer to the first
question is testing and jvt on the
science of immunity
what I'd says that antibody testing is
incredibly important we have antibody
tests in the field at the moment they're
being used for surveys they are lab
based rather than the rather than the
automatic response tests that we looked
into in great detail a month or so ago
but then none of them were effective
enough to be used for clinical reasons
but they can still be used for surveys
so we have surveys in the field both
with the stick tests and also with lab
based serology which detects antibodies
and so we will be getting an estimates
as soon of the proportion of the
population who have the antibodies and
the test tests for whether the
antibodies are there the effect of the
antibodies on your risk to catching or
transmitting corona virus in the future
is is the next important step in that
and the science on that has been rapidly
developing and I asked Jamie to update
on that yes thank you for the question
so on antibodies one of the things we
want to know is when you've had in Kovac
19 infection do you get antibodies do
they protect you against further
instances of the same illness and how
long are they going to protect you for
so that's kind of three questions really
so let's chop this up into three answers
and the first answer is the first thing
we wanted to know was what you've had
confirmed Kovac 19 infection do you get
antibodies and one of the things that
we've been interested in and want to do
is call people back who've had a Cove
igniting for sure and who've recovered
to ask them if they'll begin to take
part in a program we're starting to get
plasma containing antibodies and use it
for treatment in the future in trials to
understand if it's going to work and
save life
and the good news on that is that that
program has started and the overwhelming
majority of people so far called back
who've had definite kovat 19 infection
have got antibodies in their blood
stream which is a good news thing so
those antibodies take different times in
different people to develop but by and
large the signal is that people get
antibodies the next question is do those
antibodies protect you from further
infections and we just haven't had this
disease around on the planet in humans
for long enough to know the answers to
that with any surety and that's a piece
of science that we will just have to
follow a bit longer I hope the answer is
yes but I think it's one where we have
to be much clearer before we can take
that responsibility of giving you a very
clear answer on that and then the final
piece is how long will the antibodies
last and we do know that for other
normal coronaviruses if that's the right
word the ones that are a couple of
viruses that together with many others
cause what we call the common cold that
those antibodies don't persist
necessarily for years and years and
years now it doesn't follow that that's
going to be the case with Kovach 19 we
do not know at this point we will have
to simply follow people who've recovered
and test them repeatedly until we have
an understanding of how long antibodies
last and how long they protect for but
there is an absolutely massive piece of
work now underway multiple studies to
look for antibodies in different
populations in the UK and indeed to
follow some people who have recovered
for long periods of time into the future
at least a couple of years and we will
have much clearer signals over time
but afraid it's just one of those where
we can't make the science go any faster
than how quickly our bodies go in terms
of maintaining the antibodies and like
everybody else in the world we just have
to be patient and cautious until we get
those answers but I do believe in the
long run once we have those kind of
answers potentially antibody testing
will be a very important part of our
future strategy and then also to test
whether I get it again because we have
surveys in the field right now to test
if people with antibodies then catch the
disease which is an absolutely critical
fact that will then determine policy
over what we say people with antibodies
who tested positive on an antibody test
can do and which is at the moment we
don't yet have the science to make those
policy decisions but it will be
absolutely critical it's just just
briefly on the testing there's been very
good but also people looking at ways in
of doing antibody tests close to the
person the patient a number of options
there including a saliva test and all of
these options are looking quite
promising and being evaluated so I think
in general we can say as we did as we
thought that there would be antibody
tests available when we needed them and
they will support also our contact
tracing program strategy state likes
full of risks and this is all about
balance of risks you're somebody who's
probably going to body's would you feel
happy going into a kroehner room not yet
not yet I very much hope that the
science shows that the people with
antibody
who tested positive for having
antibodies have a low risk of
transmitting the disease and the low
risk of catching it both are important
because low risk of catching it to
protect me low risk of transmitting it
to protect others
I very much hope that that's where the
science comes out that is true of most
corona viruses i but we've got to make
sure that we've got the science because
until we know that's the case we can't
be sure of it we can't base a policy
decision on it and I can't be
comfortable doing what you mentioned in
the question because that might simply
trigger a rise in the number of
infections if the science turns out to
be wrong and there are so many novel
things about this corona virus the there
are so many things that are different to
previous there's the six existing corona
viruses that we do have to test this and
not base our assumptions on how other
corona viruses behave because you you
know I we don't want to take a risk of
assuming this corona virus behaves like
other corona viruses before saying and
taking a policy decision the people with
antibodies are lower risk and but if the
science concludes that they that they
are and will take decisions on on that
basis and I would say this this point of
John was that there's been big advances
in antibody testing especially the lab
based on t body testing is very it's
very important today rush the swiss
global diagnostics company made a very
positive announcement about progress
with their antibody tests and we're in
discussions with them about a very
large-scale rollout of antibody testing
as well as with some others who may be
able to bring this forward but there's
been false hope
before in antibody testing and so will
will make announcements when we're
absolutely ready thanks very much Joe
Paul wall from The Huffington Post
health secretary as you frequently said
the long-term solution to
is a fully scalable vaccine for Kobe 19
but a vaccine relies on as many people
as possible actually taking it up now
you told off post last year and I quote
there's a very strong argument having
compulsory vaccinations to children for
when they go to school because otherwise
they're putting other children at risk
would that apply to a coded vaccine as
well as to MMR and other vaccines and
one of the measures are you looking at
to ensure as many adults and children
take up the new vaccine when it's
available and if I came to professor Van
Dam what you've made of the early
academic research done in Harvard
Germany and even Cambridge that suggests
high levels of air pollution may be one
of the most important contributors the
clustering of deaths from Kobe 19 he's a
saint looking at that or going to look
at that thanks for two very good
questions on the vaccine the first and
most important thing is that we support
the development of the vaccine
you've all seen the Prime Minister's
excellent announcement today and then we
also ensure do the work to ensure that
people can get access to the vaccine
starting with and the on the question of
whether to make it compulsory I think
that the extent of the public's reaction
to following the lockdown shows that we
will be able to achieve very very high
levels of vaccination without taking
that step and and so our task is to
ensure that it is in the first instance
because we called assumed will be a
vaccine
there's no coronavirus vaccine yet and
for any of the existing coronaviruses
and this is uncertain science but whilst
I don't rule anything out
we're presuming we're proceeding on the
basis that just such a huge proportion
of the population are going to take this
up because of the obvious benefits to
individuals and their families and their
communities and indeed the whole nation
that there'll be enormous demand for it
as and when the is safe to proceed yes
thank you sector so just to stay on the
vaccine question for a little longer and
we are following the developments in
vaccine research across the world
including in the UK we remain very
hopeful that there will be a
breakthrough at some point in the future
I think what I can say to you is that it
is more likely than not that the first
vaccines will be licensed in adults in
the first instance and therefore we'll
have to take
put some caveats around your question
around children and the other thing to
say is that so far the epidemiological
evidence is not showing us that there is
a massive burden of disease mortality in
children it is actually completely at
the other end of the scale it is in the
elderly and so from that perspective
again that's another caveat I'd add to
your question about vaccinating children
on the second question about air
pollution and thank you for that I think
we already have a very solid data and
that air pollution contributes to a
whole range of mortality particularly
from respiratory illnesses and
respiratory diseases and cardiovascular
disease I have heard it said about air
pollution and kovat 19 I have not
personally
studied those data and looked at that
question in detail but what you say is
entirely plausible in my view and
professor Newton may have some further
observations on just one brief follow-up
safe to say a message
those anti-vaxxers here and abroad when
we when and if we do get a vaccine for
mid-nineteen I think there has been no
greater demonstration in modern history
the vaccines save lives than the need
for a vaccine to save lives and to get
the world going again following the
outbreak of Kovach 19 and we will only
license a vaccine is both effective and
safe and when the independent regulators
even when the independent regulators
license a vaccine in this country they
will do so knowing that it is safe and
everybody should follow that everybody
should follow that advice thanks very
much and finally we're going to go to
Louise Hill from the Isle of Wight
County press q mr. secretary and on the
line of light I have seen own a mixed
reaction to the app but a main concern
that keeps occurring is whether you can
enjoy residents who are weary of using
the app and this technology throughout
this trial and going forward about
awareness that works yes absolutely this
is an incredibly important question I
was very glad to hear from Oliver from
our wide radio that on his initial
survey there was a very high degree of
support for the for the app and for
downloading it but it has been the app
has been designed with privacy and
security front of mind it's been signed
off by the national cybersecurity center
who've been involved in its development
now want to thank them and pay tribute
to the work that they've done in
ensuring that the privacy and
cybersecurity is strong the data is
stored on an individual's phone not by
the by the NHS until somebody finds that
they've got symptoms and then they need
a test and so they need to connect the
NHS
and then you need to be our chest needs
to contact those who you've been in
contact with and so the this has this
has the highest level of privacy
built-in to make sure that we can both
reassure people in terms of privacy but
also that it can be effective and save
lives just to be absolutely clear the
app itself doesn't hold any personal
information
it just has information about the phone
where it was which other phones it's
been in contact with but only using
anonymized ran who generated numbers and
those are the data that are collected so
no personal information is generally is
contained by the or generated by their
the circuits that the only personal
information used is when somebody
approaches the NHS to have a test it's a
very safe use of data and people really
should feel very very sure thanks very
much that means people ready either at
home making very limited trips and as
the actors predominantly enter the
audience needs workers will that
guarantees enough useful danger this is
a really important question that we
thought about when selecting where to to
trial it and because there's a busy
hospital on the island and there's other
and key workers including those who work
for the council for instance and in the
other services and the right across the
board there are there are interactions
and there are new cases on the and so we
think that it will be effective and
it'll be an effective place to pilot and
but also we think
trap-and-trace system as a whole will be
more effective when there are fewer new
cases because then when you do find a
new case we can really support that
person find out who they've been in
contact with and then contact all of
those people and it's quite a
maleficence support into then trying to
stop that case from spreading any
further so actually the the test track
and trace system as a whole will be more
effective when there's fewer cases and
currently there are fewer cases on the
island than there are in the rest of the
country thank you very much indeed
thanks to for all the questions from the
public from the national media from the
Isle of Wight and very grateful for this
opportunity and to have set out these
details of our test track the test track
and trace program and look forward to
seeing you again here from here in
Downing Street very soon thanks very
much